---
published: false
---
Fifty years ago, the first molecular dynamics papers simulated systems with a few dozen atoms for picoseconds (a picosecond is one-trillionth of a second). Today, due to tremendous gains in computational capability from Moore's law, and due to significant gains in algorithmic sophisticiation from fifty years of researcher, scientists can simulate systems with hundreds of thousands of atoms for milliseconds at a time. To summarize, scientists today can study systems tens of thousands of times larger, for a billion times longer than they could fifty years go. In total, the effective reach of physical simulation techniques has expanded handleable complexity ten-trillion fold.

This suggests that one day we should be able to understand a complete human cell.
But how complex is an actual cell? A quick check to [references](http://book.bionumbers.org/how-big-is-a-human-cell/) suggests that a human sperm cell has a volume of 30 cubic micrometers. Another check to a [reference](http://book.bionumbers.org/what-is-the-density-of-cells/) suggests that many human cells have densities quite similar to that of water (1000 kg per cubic meter). Now, using the final fact that the molar mass of water is 18 grams, a quick calculation suggests that human sperm cells have roughly a trillion atoms. For another datapoint, [assuming](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1058674183710165) neuronal cell volume of 6000 cubic micrometers, the analogous number for neurons is roughly 175 trillion atoms per cell. In addition to the increased spatial complexity, cellular processes take much longer than molecular processes, with mitosis (cell division) occurring on the order of hours. Let’s assume that mitosis takes eight hours for a standard cell. Putting together the series of calculations that we've just done suggests that exhaustively understanding a single sperm cell would require an increase in spatial complexity from hundreds of thousands of atoms to trillions of atoms, and from millisecond simulations to multi-hour simulations. Put another way, exhaustive simulations of sperm cells will require 10 million fold increases in spatial complexity and about 10 million fold increase in simulation length, for a total increase in complexity on the order of the hundred-trillion fold. Assuming Moore's law continues in some form, we are at least 50 years of hard research away from achieving thorough understanding of the simplest of human cells.

Let's extend the thought experiment a bit further. How far is human science from understanding a human brain? There [are](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2776484/) roughly a hundred-billion neurons in the brain, and human-learning occurs on the order of years. Assuming that each neuron contains 175 trillion atoms, the total brain contains roughly 1.75 * 10^25 atoms. To put this number in perspective, that's roughly 29 [moles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_(unit)) of atoms! It follows that the increase in spatial complexity from today's limits would need to increase a billion-trillion fold (20 orders of magnitude from today's limit). As for time complexity, there are rougly 31 million seconds in a year, so simulations would need to run tens of billions of times longer than today's millisecond computations to understand the dynamics of human learning. Combining both of these numbers, roughly 30 orders of magnitude increase in handleable total complexity is required to exhaustively understand the human brain. Once again assuming Moore's law continues, we are at least 100 years of hard research from achieving thorough understanding of the human brain.

An important point that I've finessed in the preceding paragraphs is that both estimates above are likely underestimates. An important fact about biological systems that is often ignored is that all nontrivial molecules exhibit significant quantum entanglement. The wavefunctions of biological macromolecules are quite sophisticated, and until [recently](http://www.petachem.com/publications.html) have remained beyond the reach of even the most approximate solutions to Schrodinger's equation. As a result, most simulations of biomolecular systems use crude approximation to handle fundamental biological phenomenon such as phosphorylation or ATP processing. Consequently more accurate simulations of the cell will require extremely large quantum simulations on a scale that far beyond today's capabilities. We have to assume that a Moore's law for quantum computing will emerge for our estimates to have any hope of remaining accurate. However, given the extreme difficulty of maintaining large entangled states, no such progress has yet emerged from the nascent quantum computing discipline.. 

To summarize our discussion, simple back-of-the-envelope calculations hint at the extraordinary complexity that undergirds biological systems. Singulatarians routinely posit that it will be possible to upload our brains into the cloud within the not-too-distant future. The calculations within this article were intended as a reality check upon such musings. Will it may well be possible to one day upload human brains into computing systems, the computational requirements to simulate a brain (a necessary component for high-fidelity upload) are so daunting that even optimistic estimates yield a range of a hundred years of hard research required. Given that the US National Science Foundation is only [66](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Science_Foundation#History_and_mission) years old, the futility of planning research programs on the century time scale becomes more apparent.

None of this is to suggest that computational investigation of biological systems is useless. On the contrary, I believe that increased use of computation is the best path forward for science to begin to comprehend the dazzling array of biological phenomenon that undergird even the most pedestrian life forms. However, today's scientific environment is filled with [AI-hype](http://smerity.com/articles/2016/ml_not_magic.html), which naively suggests that artificial intelligence can solve the hardest problems in short time frames. The danger of such thinking is when such systems run into their inevitable failures, disappointed backers will start questioning research plans and will start pulling funding. Cold breezes from AI-winter have already started drifting into research buildings following the tragic death of [Joshua Brown](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk) in a self-driving Tesla. Creating the solid research plans and organizations that will be required to cross the immense challenges that lie between modern science and revolutionary advances in intelligence requires scientists to combat the spread of hype and naive forecasts of AI utopia.
